.\" pve-import-cloud-images - Import upstream cloud images as PVE templates
.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 Ciro Iriarte
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH PVE\-IMPORT\-CLOUD\-IMAGES 8 "2026-03-27" "1.3.0" "Proxmox VE Tools"
.SH NAME
pve\-import\-cloud\-images \- import upstream cloud images as Proxmox VE templates
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pve\-import\-cloud\-images
.RB [ \-i | \-b | \-l ]
.RB [ \-m
.IR MODE ]
.RB [ \-s
.IR STORAGE ]
.RB [ \-B
.IR BRIDGE ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR FORMAT ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR SIZE ]
.RB [ \-I
.IR VMID ]
.RB [ \-d
.IR DISTRO ]
.RB [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pve\-import\-cloud\-images
dynamically scans distribution mirrors to discover the latest cloud images,
downloads them, and imports them as Proxmox VE templates ready for cloning
with cloud-init.
No URLs are hardcoded; the script probes mirrors at runtime to find the most
recent releases.
.PP
For each image the workflow is:
.IP 1. 4
Download the cloud image (cached in
.IR /var/tmp/pve\-cloud\-images/ ).
.IP 2. 4
Probe the image for the precise OS version via
.BR virt\-cat (1)
(e.g. Debian\ 12 becomes 12.13).
.IP 3. 4
Optionally inject
.B qemu\-guest\-agent
via
.BR virt\-customize (1).
.IP 4. 4
Create a VM shell with EFI, virtio\-scsi, serial console, and a cloud\-init
drive.
.IP 5. 4
Import the disk and convert the VM to a template.
.PP
The script supports two execution modes:
.TP
.B local
Uses PVE command\-line tools
.RB ( qm ,
.BR qemu\-img )
directly on the node.
.TP
.B api
Uses the PVE REST API via
.BR curl (1).
No SSH or local PVE tools are required; suitable for running from a
jump host.
Requires PVE\ 8.4 or later.
.SS Supported distributions
The last two releases of each family are discovered automatically:
.TS
tab(|);
lb lb lb
l l l.
Family|Mirror|Notes
_
Debian|cdimage.debian.org|qemu-guest-agent injected
Ubuntu LTS|cloud-images.ubuntu.com|qemu-guest-agent injected
Rocky Linux|dl.rockylinux.org|generic and LVM variants
openSUSE Leap|download.opensuse.org|ptp_kvm module fix
Oracle Linux|yum.oracle.com|v10 requires x86-64-v3
FreeBSD|download.freebsd.org|VM notes with install instructions
.TE
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Execution modes
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interactive
Select images interactively via a menu.
This is the default when standard input is a terminal.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-batch
Import all discovered images non-interactively.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List discovered images and exit.
Does not require
.BR \-\-mode .
.SS Required for import
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-mode " " \fIMODE\fR
Execution mode:
.B local
(PVE CLI tools) or
.B api
(REST API).
Required when importing images.
.SS Storage and network
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-storage " " \fINAME\fR
Target storage for VM disks.
Default:
.BR local\-lvm .
.TP
.BR \-B ", " \-\-bridge " " \fINAME\fR
Network bridge for the template VM.
Default:
.BR vmbr0 .
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-format " " \fIFMT\fR
Disk format:
.BR raw " or " qcow2 .
Default:
.BR raw .
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-disk\-size " " \fISIZE\fR
Resize the boot disk after import (e.g.
.BR 60G ).
Default: keep the original size.
.TP
.BR \-I ", " \-\-start\-id " " \fIID\fR
Starting VM ID for templates.
Default:
.BR 9000 .
.SS Filtering and customization
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-distro " " \fINAME\fR
Restrict import to a single distribution family:
.BR debian ", " ubuntu ", " rocky ", " opensuse ", " oracle ", or " freebsd .
.TP
.B \-\-force
Replace existing templates that have the same VM\ ID.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-customize
Skip
.BR virt\-customize (1)
(guest\-agent injection and related tweaks).
.TP
.BI \-\-arch " ARCH"
Target architecture.
Default:
.BR x86_64 .
.SS API mode options
.TP
.BI \-\-api\-host " URL"
PVE API base URL (e.g.
.IR https://pve.example.com:8006 ).
.TP
.BI \-\-api\-node " NAME"
PVE node name (e.g.
.IR pve1 ).
.TP
.BI \-\-api\-token " TOKEN"
API token in the format
.IR user@realm!tokenid=secret .
.TP
.BI \-\-api\-import\-storage " NAME"
Storage used for downloading images before import.
Default:
.BR local .
.SS General
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be done without making any changes.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the built\-in help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show the version number and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
List available images (no root required):
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-import\-cloud\-images \-\-list
.fi
.RE
.PP
Interactive selection in local mode:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-import\-cloud\-images \-\-mode local \-i
.fi
.RE
.PP
Batch import all images:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-import\-cloud\-images \-\-mode local \-\-batch
.fi
.RE
.PP
Import only Debian templates to a specific storage:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-import\-cloud\-images \-\-mode local \-\-batch \-\-distro debian \e
    \-\-storage ceph\-pool
.fi
.RE
.PP
Dry run to preview actions:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-import\-cloud\-images \-\-mode local \-\-dry\-run \-\-batch
.fi
.RE
.PP
Remote import via API:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-import\-cloud\-images \-\-mode api \e
    \-\-api\-host https://pve.example.com:8006 \e
    \-\-api\-node pve1 \e
    \-\-api\-token \(aquser@pam!tokenid=secret\-uuid\(aq \e
    \-\-batch \-\-storage local\-zfs
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/tmp/pve\-cloud\-images/
Download cache directory.
Images are reused across runs to avoid redundant downloads.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Failure (missing dependencies, download error, import error, etc.).
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.SS Local mode
.BR qm (1),
.BR qemu\-img (1),
.BR wget (1)
or
.BR curl (1).
Optional:
.BR libguestfs\-tools
(for guest\-agent injection),
.BR xz (1)
(for FreeBSD images).
.SS API mode
.BR curl (1)
only.
.SH NOTES
.SS EL10 / x86\-64\-v3 requirement
Rocky Linux\ 10 and Oracle Linux\ 10 (RHEL\ 10\-based) require x86\-64\-v3
(Haswell or newer).
VMs will fail to boot on hosts with older CPUs.
Verify host support:
.PP
.RS
.nf
/lib/ld\-linux\-x86\-64.so.2 \-\-help 2>&1 | grep supported
.fi
.RE
.SS FreeBSD guest agent
FreeBSD images cannot be customized offline (Linux cannot write to UFS2),
so
.B qemu\-guest\-agent
must be installed after first boot.
See the
.I README.md
for cloud\-init snippet examples.
.SS API token setup
Create a token on the PVE host:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pveum user token add root@pam cloudimport \-\-privsep 0
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR qm (1),
.BR qemu\-img (1),
.BR virt\-customize (1),
.BR virt\-cat (1),
.BR pve\-vmnic\-fix (8),
.BR pve\-create\-tshoot\-image (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Ciro Iriarte
.RI < ciro.iriarte+software@gmail.com >
.SH LICENSE
MIT
