.\" pve-vmnic-fix - Repair VM/CT network bridges after host network changes
.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 Ciro Iriarte
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH PVE\-VMNIC\-FIX 8 "2026-03-27" "1.0.0" "Proxmox VE Tools"
.SH NAME
pve\-vmnic\-fix \- repair VM/CT network bridges after host network changes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pve\-vmnic\-fix
.RB [ \-n ]
.IR VMID | CTID
.br
.B pve\-vmnic\-fix
.RB [ \-n ]
.BR \-a | \-\-all
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pve\-vmnic\-fix
repairs network connectivity for running VMs and containers after
host\-level network changes such as applying a pending network configuration,
restarting the networking service, or reloading SDN.
.PP
It inspects each guest's network interfaces and fixes:
.IP \(bu 3
tap/veth interfaces that have lost their bridge master.
.IP \(bu 3
Firewall intermediary links
.RB ( fwbr / fwpr / fwln )
that are in a DOWN state.
.IP \(bu 3
EVPN not learning guest MACs after a bridge reset.
.PP
For each network interface the script:
.IP 1. 4
Checks whether the tap/veth device is attached to the correct bridge.
.IP 2. 4
Re\-attaches it if the bridge master is missing.
.IP 3. 4
Brings up any DOWN firewall chain interfaces
.RB ( fwbr ", " fwpr ", " fwln ).
.IP 4. 4
Re\-announces the guest MAC via FDB for EVPN learning.
.PP
The script auto\-detects whether a given ID is a VM or a container by
querying
.BR qm (1)
and
.BR pct (1).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.IR VMID | CTID
Numeric ID of a single VM or container to fix.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
Fix all running VMs and containers on the node.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be done without making any changes.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the built\-in help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show the version number and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Fix a single guest:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-vmnic\-fix 100
.fi
.RE
.PP
Fix all running VMs and containers:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-vmnic\-fix \-\-all
.fi
.RE
.PP
Preview changes without applying them:
.PP
.RS
.nf
pve\-vmnic\-fix \-\-dry\-run \-\-all
.fi
.RE
.PP
Sample output:
.PP
.RS
.nf
:: Fixing vm 100
   Checking net0 (bridge: vmbr0)...
   [+] net0 OK
:: Done. 1 guest(s), 1 interface(s) checked, 0 repaired.
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Failure (invalid arguments, guest not found, etc.).
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.BR qm (1),
.BR pct (1),
.BR ip (8),
.BR bridge (8).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR qm (1),
.BR pct (1),
.BR ip (8),
.BR bridge (8),
.BR pve\-import\-cloud\-images (8),
.BR pve\-create\-tshoot\-image (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Ciro Iriarte
.RI < ciro.iriarte+software@gmail.com >
.SH LICENSE
MIT
